[LWG motion 2] P0543R3 Saturation arithmetic (#6686)
cplusplus/draft: source/algorithms.tex

where the result of the division is truncated towards zero.
\end{itemdescr}

\rSec2[numeric.sat]{Saturation arithmetic}

\rSec3[numeric.sat.func]{Arithmetic functions}

\pnum
\begin{note}
In the following descriptions, an arithmetic operation
is performed as a mathematical operation with infinite range and then
it is determined whether the mathematical result fits into the result type.
\end{note}

\indexlibraryglobal{add_sat}%
\begin{itemdecl}
template<class T>
  constexpr T add_sat(T x, T y) noexcept;
\end{itemdecl}

\begin{itemdescr}
\pnum
\constraints
\tcode{T} is a signed or unsigned integer type\iref{basic.fundamental}.

\pnum
\returns

> If \tcode{x + y} is representable as a value of type \tcode{T}, \tcode{x + y};

Reviewer: I don't think we want to use code font for the arithmetic operators, as that implies the C++ expression `x + y` which is not performed in infinite precision. For unsigned types with width no less than `int` the result of `x + y` always fits in `T`, by definition.

@jensmaurer, the paper doesn't use code font for anything here, not even the type `T`. What was the intended presentation for the standard?

Reviewer 2: We definitely want the computation to be in the math domain, otherwise "is representable" doesn't make sense.
x and y are parameters, so need to be monospace, I think.

Reviewer 3: I thought it was fine due to the first paragraph.
But turns out it's a note.
> [ Note: In the following descriptions, an arithmetic operation is performed as a mathematical operation with infinite range and then it is determined whether the mathematical result fits into the result type. ]

Reviewer 4: Can we make the note not be a note? It seems necessary for the understanding of the text. Then, we can spell this as `$\tcode{x} + \tcode{y}$, that'd be close enough I think.

Reviewer 2: There are other situations where we use math arithmetic and then map back to C++. For example, most prominently, in [expr.pre] p4 to determine when a result is undefined. But, if you feel the note needs to be normative, go for it.

Reviewer 4: I think with the formatting changes, we can just about leave it as is. It should perhaps be for LWG to decide whether the specification is sufficiently clear here. @jwakely Should I create an LWG issue for this, or just an informal mail to the reflector maybe?

Reviewer: Just an email is fine, I think.

otherwise, either the largest or smallest representable value of type \tcode{T},
% FIXME: Do we define what is means for one value to be "closer" to another?

> whichever is closer to the value of \tcode{x + y}.

Reviewer: This is the normal English use of the word. 130 is closer to 127 than to -128. 70000 is closer to 65535 than to 0.

template<class T>
  constexpr T sub_sat(T x, T y) noexcept;
\end{itemdecl}

\begin{itemdescr}
\pnum
\constraints
\tcode{T} is a signed or unsigned integer type\iref{basic.fundamental}.

\pnum
\returns
If \tcode{x - y} is representable as a value of type \tcode{T}, \tcode{x - y};
otherwise, either the largest or smallest representable value of type \tcode{T},
whichever is closer to the value of \tcode{x - y}.
\end{itemdescr}

\indexlibraryglobal{mul_sat}%
\begin{itemdecl}
template<class T>
  constexpr T mul_sat(T x, T y) noexcept;
\end{itemdecl}

\begin{itemdescr}
\pnum
\constraints
\tcode{T} is a signed or unsigned integer type\iref{basic.fundamental}.

\pnum
\returns
If \tcode{x * y} is representable as a value of type \tcode{T}, \tcode{x * y};
otherwise, either the largest or smallest representable value of type \tcode{T},
whichever is closer to the value of \tcode{x * y}.
\end{itemdescr}

\indexlibraryglobal{div_sat}%
\begin{itemdecl}
template<class T>
  constexpr T div_sat(T x, T y) noexcept;
\end{itemdecl}

\begin{itemdescr}
\pnum
\constraints
\tcode{T} is a signed or unsigned integer type\iref{basic.fundamental}.

\pnum
\expects
\tcode{y != 0} is \tcode{true}.

> \pnum
> Let \tcode{q} be \tcode{x / y}, with any fractional part discarded.
> 
> \pnum
> \returns
> If \tcode{q} is representable as a value of type \tcode{T}, \tcode{q};
> otherwise, either the largest or smallest representable value of type \tcode{T},
> whichever is closer to the value of \tcode{q}.

Reviewer 5: It seems that we can simply the specification, since IIUC saturation is only needed when `x` is the most negative value and `y == -1`,
```suggestion
\pnum
\returns
If \tcode{T} is a signed integer type and \tcode{x == numeric_limits<T>::min() && y == -1}
is \tcode{true}, \tcode{numeric_limits<T>::max()}, otherwise, \tcode{x / y}.
```

Reviewer 4: That's nice, done!

\pnum
\remarks
A function call expression

> that violates the precondition in the \expects element

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
that violates the precondition in the \Fundescx{Preconditions} element
```

is not a core constant expression\iref{expr.const}.
\end{itemdescr}

\rSec3[numeric.sat.cast]{Casting}

\indexlibraryglobal{saturate_cast}%
\begin{itemdecl}
template<class T, class U>

>   constexpr T saturate_cast(U x) noexcept;

Reviewer: It seems mildly confusing that we have `std::in_range<R>(T t)` in `<utility>` but `std::saturating_cast<T>(U x)` in `<numeric>`.

Should we use `R` and `T` here too?

Reviewer 2: I don't object.

Reviewer 4: Done!
